Enhancement doc to customize catalogs and sub-catalogs (#1206)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/console/customize-catalogs.md

---
title: customize-catalogs
authors:
  - "@lokanandaprabhu"
reviewers:
  - "@jerolimov"
  - "@spadgett"
approvers:
  - "@spadgett"
  - "@cvogt"
api-approvers:
  - "@JoelSpeed"
creation-date: 2022-07-27
last-updated: 2022-08-25
tracking-link: 
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ODC-6695
status: implementable
---

# Customize Catalogs

## Summary

The OpenShift Console provides a "Developer Catalog" which enables 
the user to create apps and services based on Operator backed services, helm charts, templates, etc.

Cluster admins can provide additional catalog items and types by installing operators or adding helm repositories.
Cluster administrators want to hide these types.

Under the developer catalog,
there are categories and sub-categories. When users select a sub-category, they can see the list
of types to install. This enhancement allows cluster admins to selectively disable these types.

![Developer catalog and types list](customize-catalogs.png)
 
## Motivation

Cluster administrators don't want the users to use the catalog 
to install anything in the cluster until

> customization. Cluster administrators want to 

Reviewer: I'm a little unclear on this first sentence... Nothing is blocking the user from doing this, correct?

Author: Updated the doc. PTAL.

> Cluster administrators don't want the users to use the catalog 
> to install anything in the cluster until
> customization. Cluster administrators want to 
> disable developer catalog or certain types for all users.

Reviewer 2: This sounds like the developer catalog doesn't make sense until its customized. I would rephrase it a little bit so that its clear that the developer catalog is fine for most people, but this allows the admin to disable some unwanted (unsupported by their own support team) catalogs -- without uninstalling an operator that extends this or disabling for example Helm completely.

```suggestion
The developer catalog can be extended by plugins and also dynamically by installing a console plugin or an operator.

Some customers want to align their development process and have teams that support other development teams with their work.
For this cluster administrators want to hide developer sub-catalog (types) without disabling a full console plugin, for example by uninstalling an operator.
By hiding for example "Service Backed operators", "Helm", etc. they can still install them via the CLI, see their resources in the topology, but don't show them in the add from developer catalog flow.
```

### User Stories

#### Story 1

> As a cluster admin, I want to hide Developer catalog for all users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a cluster admin, I want to hide Developer catalog for all users.

For example for customers who has their own way to install workloads, services, etc. without the developer catalog.
```

#### Story 2

> As a cluster admin, I want to hide certain types for all users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a cluster admin, I want to hide certain sub-catalogs (types) for all users.

For example for customers who don't want to use Helm charts, or another sub-catalog without disabling Helm support in the whole developer console.
```

### Goals

> - Allow cluster admins to hide the developer catalog or certain types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Allow cluster admins to hide the developer catalog or certain sub-catalogs (types).
```

> - Provide information to admin about types they can hide from users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Provide information to admins about sub-catalogs (types) they can hide from users.
```

### Workflow Description

```text
├── spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── developerCatalog 
|           ├── disabledTypes
|               └──       
└── ...
```

Each catalog conforms to the following schema:

// +optional
- `disabledTypes: string[]` , defines a list of types to hide. 
Types will vary based on the operator installed.

### API Extensions

Extend the existing `Console` CRD to add `spec.customization.developerCatalog.disabledTypes` which 
can have list of types disabled. 

So the example yaml should look like this one:

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata: 
  name: cluster
  ...
spec: 
  customization:
    developerCatalog:
      disabledTypes: 
        - Devfile
        - HelmChart
  ...
```

If all the available types are listed in `spec.customization.developerCatalog.disabledTypes` 
then the complete developer catalog will be disabled. 
A `ConsoleYAMLSample` snippet will be provided for disabling types in the console YAML editor.

### Risks and Mitigations

**Save disabled**: Saving just the disabled types would 
show (expected or unexpected) new type if a new operator is installed.

### Drawbacks

N/A

## Design Details

> N/A

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sub-catalogs (types) could be added dynamically by console plugins, for example when installing an operator.

The type is an identifier specified within the extension list of a dynamic plugin.

We will provide a configuration UI and a yaml snippet in the console to provide a list of these dynamic available sub-catalogs / types.
```

---
title: customize-catalogs
authors:
  - "@lokanandaprabhu"
reviewers:
  - "@jerolimov"
  - "@spadgett"
approvers:
  - "@spadgett"
  - "@cvogt"

> api-approvers:
>   - "@jerolimov"
>   - "@cvogt"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
api-approvers:
  - "@JoelSpeed"
```

The OpenShift Console provides a "Developer Catalog" which enables 
the user to create apps and services based on Operator backed services, helm charts, templates, etc.

Cluster admins can provide additional catalog items and types by installing operators or adding helm repositories.
Cluster administrators want to hide these types.

Under the developer catalog,
there are categories and sub-categories. When users select a sub-category, they can see the list
of types to install. This enhancement enable cluster admins to customize these types.

![Developer catalog and types list](customize-catalogs.png)
 
## Motivation

Cluster administrators don't want the users to use the catalog 
to install anything in the cluster until
permission is given. Cluster administrators want to 
disable developer catalog or certain types for all users.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a cluster admin, I want to hide Developer catalog for all users.

#### Story 2

As a cluster admin, I want to hide certain types for all users.

### Goals

- Allow cluster admins to hide the developer catalog or certain types.
- Provide information to admin about types they can hide from users.

### Non-Goals

> N/A

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allow cluster admins to customize categories or hide individual items
```

|               └──       
└── ...
```

Each catalog conforms to the following schema:

// +optional
- `disableTypes: string[]` , defines a list of types to hide. 
Types will vary based on the operator installed.

### API Extensions

Extend the existing `Console` CRD to add `spec.customization.developerCatalog.disableTypes` which 
can have list of types disabled. 

So the example yaml should look like this one:

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata: 
  name: cluster
  ...
spec: 
  customization:
    developerCatalog:
      disableTypes: 
        - Devfile
        - HelmChart
  ...
```

If all the available types are listed in `spec.customization.developerCatalog.disableTypes` 
then the complete developer catalog will be disabled. 
A `ConsoleYAMLSample` snippet will be provided for disabling types in the console YAML editor.

### Risks and Mitigations

**Save disabled**: Saving just the disabled types would 
show (expected or unexpected) new type if a new operator is installed.

### Drawbacks

N/A

## Design Details

N/A

### Test Plan

Testing will be carried out with the usual Console unit and e2e test suites.

### Graduation Criteria

> None

Reviewer: I would say here the feature will be GA initially.

---
title: customize-catalogs
authors:
  - "@lokanandaprabhu"
reviewers:
  - "@jerolimov"
  - "@spadgett"
approvers:
  - "@spadgett"
  - "@cvogt"
api-approvers:
  - "@jerolimov"
  - "@cvogt"
creation-date: 2022-07-27
last-updated: 2022-08-18
tracking-link: 
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ODC-6695
status: implementable
---

# Customize Catalogs

## Summary

In the developer catalog, there are categories and sub-categories,
for each category and sub-category there are sub-catalogs/types
that user can install. This document provides details about how 
cluster administrator can hide developer catalog and sub-catalogs. 

https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Pn-ZyWk0qBgquVMUhfG8H_BXNN9dWBWy/view?usp=sharing , 
this is the screenshot for reference, under Developer Catalog,
there are categories and sub-categories, when user selects, they can see the list
of types to install (Which is in the bottom left corner). Cluster administrator 
wants to hide these sub-catalogs.

## Motivation

Cluster Administrator don't want the users to use the catalog 
to install anything in the cluster until
the permission is given. Cluster administrator wants to 

> disable developer catalog and sub-catalogs for all users.

Author: Yes they are different. In the image added,  Languages, Databases, Middleware, CI/CD are categories and sub-menus are sub-categories. Sub-catalogs are the types(with heading Type in bottom left corner) to install the catalog.

> disable developer catalog and sub-catalogs for all users.

Reviewer: @lokanandaprabhu Thanks, I would recommend referring to these as categories, subcategories, and types to avoid confusion.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a cluster admin, I want to hide Developer catalog for all users.

#### Story 2

As a cluster admin, I want to hide sub-catalogs for all users.

### Goals

- Allow cluster admins to hide developer catalog and sub-catalogs.
- Provide information to admin about sub-catalogs they can hide from users.

### Non-Goals

N/A

## Proposal

We can extend the existing `operator.openshift.io/v1` / `Console CRD`. 
We can add 
`spec.customization.developerCatalog.types` which can have list of sub-catalogs disabled.

### Workflow Description

```text
├── spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── developerCatalog 
|           ├── types
|               └──       
└── ...
```

Each catalog conforms to the following schema:

// +optional

> - `types: authV1.ResourceAttributes[]` , defines a list of sub-catalogs to hide. 

Author: I changed the type as `string[]`, since it is the list of sub-catalogs to hide.

Types will vary based on the operator installed. Cluster administrator will be provided with 
the snippet about the available types.

### API Extensions

Extend the existing `Console` CRD to add `spec.customization.developerCatalog.types` which 
can have list of sub-catalogs disabled. 

So the example yaml should look like this one:

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata: 
  name: cluster
  ...
spec: 
  customization:
    developerCatalog:
      types: 
        - Devfile
        - HelmChart
  ...
```

If all the available types are listed in `spec.customization.developerCatalog.types` 

> then complete developer catalog will be disabled. A snippet will be provided to the cluster administrator

Author: We already have customization for categories and sub-categories, there also we are disabling the categories which are mentioned in list and the attribute name is `categories` . So we thought of keeping as `types`. If you suggest to keep it as  `disableTypes`, we can do that.

> then complete developer catalog will be disabled. A snippet will be provided to the cluster administrator

Author: Changes types as disableTypes.

> then complete developer catalog will be disabled. A snippet will be provided to the cluster administrator

Reviewer 2: Hey @lokanandaprabhu @spadgett, correct that `types` is wrong when it's a deny-list.

I would recommend to change this to `disabledTypes` so that its more aligned with:

1. QuickStarts `disabled`
https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/master/operator/v1/types_console.go#L192
and
2. Add Page `disabledActions`
https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/master/operator/v1/types_console.go#L202

---
title: customize-catalogs
authors:
  - "@lokanandaprabhu"
reviewers:
  - "@jerolimov"
  - "@spadgett"
approvers:
  - "@spadgett"
  - "@cvogt"
api-approvers:
  - "@jerolimov"
  - "@cvogt"
creation-date: 2022-07-27
last-updated: 2022-08-23
tracking-link: 
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ODC-6695
status: implementable
---

# Customize Catalogs

## Summary

The OpenShift Console provides a "Developer Catalog" which enables 
the user to create apps and services based on Operator backed services, helm charts, templates, etc.

> Cluster admins can provide additional catalog items by installing operators or adding helm repositories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cluster admins can provide additional catalog items and types by installing operators or adding helm repositories.
```

Cluster administrators want to hide these types.

Under the developer catalog,
there are categories and sub-categories. When users select a sub-category, they can see the list

> of types to install. This enhancement enable cluster admins to customize these types.

Reviewer: The types aren't customizable per se, they can only be disabled, correct?

Author: Yes

> of types/sub-catalogs to install. This enhancement enable cluster admins to customize these sub-catalogs.

Reviewer: We sometimes refer to these as types and sometimes sub-catalogs. I'd recommend consistently referring to them as "types" since it's what's shown in the UI and to avoid confusion between sub-categories and sub-catalogs.

Author: Hi @spadgett ,

Updated sub-catalogs to refer as types. PTAL. Thanks.

![Developer catalog and types list](customize-catalogs.png)
 
## Motivation

Cluster administrators don't want the users to use the catalog 
to install anything in the cluster until

> permission is given. Cluster administrators want to 

Reviewer: I'm a little unclear on what permission means here. The enhancement is simply about customizing what's visible and nothing to do with RBAC, correct?

Author: Yes.. permission here means until the customization.

> disable developer catalog and types for all users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
disable developer catalog or certain types for all users.
```

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a cluster admin, I want to hide Developer catalog for all users.

#### Story 2

> As a cluster admin, I want to hide types for all users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a cluster admin, I want to hide certain types for all users.
```

### Goals

> - Allow cluster admins to hide developer catalog and types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allow cluster admins to hide the developer catalog or certain types.
```

- Provide information to admin about types they can hide from users.

### Non-Goals

N/A

## Proposal

We can extend the existing `operator.openshift.io/v1` / `Console CRD`. 
We can add 

> `spec.customization.developerCatalog.disableTypes` which can have list of types disabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`spec.customization.developerCatalog.disableTypes` which lists types to hide.
```

### Workflow Description

```text
├── spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── developerCatalog 
|           ├── disableTypes
|               └──       
└── ...
```

Each catalog conforms to the following schema:

// +optional
- `disableTypes: string[]` , defines a list of types to hide. 

> Types will vary based on the operator installed. Cluster administrator will be provided with 
> the snippet about the available types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Types will vary based on the operator installed.
```

### API Extensions

Extend the existing `Console` CRD to add `spec.customization.developerCatalog.disableTypes` which 
can have list of types disabled. 

So the example yaml should look like this one:

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata: 
  name: cluster
  ...
spec: 
  customization:
    developerCatalog:
      disableTypes: 
        - Devfile
        - HelmChart
  ...
```

> If all the available types are listed in `spec.customization.developerCatalog.disableTypes` 
> then complete developer catalog will be disabled. A snippet will be provided to the cluster administrator
> that provide details about the available types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If all the available types are listed in `spec.customization.developerCatalog.disableTypes` 
then the complete developer catalog will be disabled. A `ConsoleYAMLSample` snippet will be provided for disabling types in the console YAML editor.
```

### Risks and Mitigations

**Save selected**: When we save selected types, new type added 
by an operator will not be shown until the cluster administrator 
updates the types list.

> This is similar to Developer Catalog categories and sub-categories! 

Reviewer: Is this still true? We are configuring only the disabled types, correct?

Author: Yes.. removed it.

**Save disabled**: Saving just the disabled types would 
show (expected or unexpected) new type if a new operator is installed.

### Drawbacks

N/A

## Design Details

N/A

### Test Plan

Testing will be carried out with the usual Console unit and e2e test suites.

### Graduation Criteria

None

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

#### Tech Preview -> GA

N/A

#### Removing a deprecated feature

N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> **Upgrade**: If there is no customization details available, by default developer catalog and types will be visible. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Upgrade**: If there are no customization details available, the default developer catalog and types will be visible. 
```

> **Downgrade**: Will not look for customization details, by default developer catalog and types will be visible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Downgrade**: Will not look for customization details. The default developer catalog and types will be visible.
```

---
title: customize-catalogs
authors:
  - "@lokanandaprabhu"
reviewers:
  - "@jerolimov"
  - "@spadgett"
approvers:
  - "@spadgett"
  - "@cvogt"
api-approvers:
  - "@jerolimov"
  - "@cvogt"
creation-date: 2022-07-27
last-updated: 2022-08-03
tracking-link: 
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ODC-6695
status: implementable
---

# Customize Catalogs

## Summary

This document provides details about how cluster administrator 

> can hide developer catalog and sub-catalogs. 

Reviewer: I'd describe what catalogs and subcatalogs are, perhaps with a screenshot.

## Motivation

> Cluster administrator wants to disable developer catalog or sub-catalogs for all users.

Reviewer 3: This is more "what" than "why". Do we have more details about why it is desirable to be able to hide catalogs from users?

Reviewer 2: The main reason is that customers don't want to use and support samples, helm charts, or whatever the extendable catalog provides. Support means here that they have an own team (infra, SRE, ...) that helps other (dev) teams to use the OpenShift console in an aligned way.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a cluster admin, I want to hide Developer catalog for all users.

#### Story 2

As a cluster admin, I want to hide sub-catalogs for all users.

### Goals

- Allow cluster admins to hide developer catalog and sub-catalogs.
- Provide information to admin about Catalogs and sub-catalogs they can hide from users.

### Non-Goals

N/A

## Proposal

We can extend the existing `operator.openshift.io/v1` / `Console CRD`. 
We can add 
`spec.customization.catalog.disabled` which can have list of perspectives disabled.

### Workflow Description

Add the disabled catalogs list along with the sub-catalogs to hide. If types are not
mentioned then complete catalog will be disabled.

```text
├── Spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── catalog 
|           ├──disabled
|             ├── name
|             ├── types
|                 └──         
└── ...
```

Each catalog conforms to the following schema:

- `disabled?: authV1.ResourceAttributes[]` , define list of catalogs to hide.
- `name?: authV1.ResourceAttributes` , defines name of catalog to hide.

> - `types?: authV1.ResourceAttributes[]` , defines a list of sub-catalogs to hide.

Reviewer: Did you mean `authV1.ResourceAttributes` or something else here?

I'd avoid using TypeScript `?` syntax since this isn't TypeScript code.

### API Extensions

> Extend the existing `Console` CRD to add `spec.customization.catalog.disabled` which can have list of catalogs and sub-catalogs disabled.

Reviewer 3: Why the `Console` CRD? Is this only hiding things in the UI?

Reviewer: > Why the `Console` CRD? Is this only hiding things in the UI?

Yes, this is only customizing the OpenShift console UI.

So the final yaml should look like this one:

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata: 
  name: cluster
  ...
spec: 
  customization:
    catalog:
      disabled:

>         - name: developerCatalog

Reviewer: What other names are allowed here?

          types: 
            - Devfile

>             - HelmChart

Reviewer: As an administrator, how do I know what types are valid?

  ...
```

To disable the complete Developer Catalog:

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata: 
  name: cluster
  ...
spec: 
  customization:
    catalog:
      disabled:
        - name: developerCatalog

>           types: []

Reviewer: This is a little confusing as an API. I wouldn't expect removing types to disable the entire catalog. Maybe we need an enum value to declare whether we're only disabling certain types or the entire catalog? We should request an API review.

In the developer catalog the sub-catalogs are shown as types. 
The developer catalog shows items from all sub-catalogs.
When user selects a sub-catalog, they can see a list of 
available items from this sub-catalog to install.

This enhancement allows cluster admins to selectively 
disable a sub-catalog and all links to the specific sub-catalog. 
The developer catalog will also hide any of the items from this sub-catalog.

![Developer catalog and types list](customize-catalogs.png)
 
## Motivation

The developer catalog can be extended by plugins and 
also dynamically by installing a console plugin or an operator.

Some customers want to align their development process and 
have teams that support other development teams with their work.
For this cluster administrators want to hide developer sub-catalog (types) 
without disabling a full console plugin, for example by uninstalling an operator.
By hiding for example "Service Backed operators", "Helm", etc. 
they can still install them via the CLI, see their resources in the topology, 
but don't show them in the add from developer catalog flow.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

> As a cluster admin, I want to hide Developer catalog for all users.

Reviewer 4: So that... This is missing the why of the user story, so that the catalog is less cluttered? So that admins can curate the available operators for their users?

Author: Updated with description.

### Goals

- Allow cluster admins to hide the developer catalog or certain sub-catalogs (types).
- Provide information to admins about sub-catalogs (types) they can hide from users.

### Non-Goals

- Allow cluster admins to customize categories or hide individual items

## Proposal

We can extend the existing `operator.openshift.io/v1` / `Console CRD`. 
We can add 
`spec.customization.developerCatalog.disabledTypes` which lists types to hide.

### Workflow Description

```text
├── spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── developerCatalog 
|           ├── disabledTypes
|               └──       
└── ...
```

Each catalog conforms to the following schema:

// +optional
- `disabledTypes: string[]` , defines a list of types to hide. 
Types will vary based on the operator installed.

### API Extensions

Extend the existing `Console` CRD to add `spec.customization.developerCatalog.disabledTypes` which 
can have list of types disabled. 

So the example yaml should look like this one:

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata: 
  name: cluster
  ...
spec: 
  customization:
    developerCatalog:

>       disabledTypes: 

Reviewer 4: Quite often when you have a `disabled` list you also have an `enabled` list. Where an empty enabled means enable all and and empty disabled list means disable none. Would it be useful to have that here as well? Then users could selectively enable only a handful of pre-curated types, rather than having to regularly extend the disabled list?

Author: We discussed about adding `enabledTypes`, for the phase 1 of this enhancement we are going only with `disabledTypes` and I added a Non-goal for adding enabled types in customization. Thanks for the suggestion.

        - Devfile
        - HelmChart
  ...
```

If all the available types are listed in `spec.customization.developerCatalog.disabledTypes` 
then the complete developer catalog will be disabled. 
A `ConsoleYAMLSample` snippet will be provided for disabling types in the console YAML editor.

### Risks and Mitigations

**Save disabled**: Saving just the disabled types would 

> show (expected or unexpected) new type if a new operator is installed.

Reviewer 4: Having an enabled option would probably mitigate this

Author: We discussed about adding enabledTypes, for the phase 1 of this enhancement we are going only with disabledTypes and I added a Non-goal for adding enabled types in customization. Thanks for the suggestion.

Reviewer 4: You can expand this section to say that, by using the enabled types field users can mitigate this

### Drawbacks

N/A

## Design Details

Sub-catalogs (types) could be added dynamically by console plugins, 
for example when installing an operator.

The type is an identifier specified within the extension list of a dynamic plugin.

We will provide a configuration UI and a yaml snippet in the 
console to provide a list of these dynamic available sub-catalogs / types.

### Test Plan

> Testing will be carried out with the usual Console unit and e2e test suites.

Reviewer 4: What specific test cases will you want QE to automate?

Author: Added the test cases

By hiding for example "Service Backed operators", "Helm", etc. 
they can still install them via the CLI, see their resources in the topology, 
but don't show them in the add from developer catalog flow.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

Customer wants to display only their own customized and validated 
templates on the dev console but they can't change the default devfiles currently.

As a cluster admin, I want to hide Developer catalog for all users.
For example for customers who has their own way to 
install workloads, services, etc. without the developer catalog.

#### Story 2

Customer wants to display only their own customized and validated 
templates on the dev console but they can't change the default devfiles currently.

As a cluster admin, I want to hide certain sub-catalogs (types) for all users.
For example for customers who don't want to use Helm charts, 
or another sub-catalog without disabling Helm support in the whole developer console.

### Goals

- Allow cluster admins to hide the developer catalog or certain sub-catalogs (types).
- Provide information to admins about sub-catalogs (types) they can hide from users.

### Non-Goals

> - Allow cluster admins to add enabled sub-catalogs (types) in customization. 

Reviewer 4: Can you explain somewhere (maybe in the alternatives) why we are making this a non-goal for now and whether this decision might change in the future?

Author: We had the discussion and decided to add `enabledTypes` as well. I updated the document.

- Allow cluster admins to customize categories or hide individual items.

## Proposal

We can extend the existing `operator.openshift.io/v1` / `Console CRD`. 
We can add 
`spec.customization.developerCatalog.disabledTypes` which lists types to hide.

### Workflow Description

```text
├── spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── developerCatalog 
|           ├── disabledTypes
|               └──       
└── ...
```

Each catalog conforms to the following schema:

// +optional
- `disabledTypes: string[]` , defines a list of types to hide. 
Types will vary based on the operator installed.

> ### API Extensions

Reviewer 4: Please add the proposed Go structure for the operator changes so that we can review that here as well

Reviewer 2: The PR is already up here https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1256, if really needed we can add this here as well.

Extend the existing `Console` CRD to add `spec.customization.developerCatalog.disabledTypes` which 
can have list of types disabled. 

So the example yaml should look like this one:

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata: 
  name: cluster
  ...
spec: 
  customization:
    developerCatalog:
      disabledTypes: 
        - Devfile
        - HelmChart
  ...
```

If all the available types are listed in `spec.customization.developerCatalog.disabledTypes` 
then the complete developer catalog will be disabled. 
A `ConsoleYAMLSample` snippet will be provided for disabling types in the console YAML editor.

### Risks and Mitigations

**Save disabled**: Saving just the disabled types would 
show (expected or unexpected) new type if a new operator is installed.

### Drawbacks

N/A

## Design Details

Sub-catalogs (types) could be added dynamically by console plugins, 
for example when installing an operator.

> The type is an identifier specified within the extension list of a dynamic plugin.

Reviewer 4: How easy is it for a user to enumerate these? If you have a screenshot of somewhere in the console that people can find this information that might help average joe to understand the complexity here

Author: We need to build UI for this to add the reference. That work needs to be done yet.

We will provide a configuration UI and a yaml snippet in the 
console to provide a list of these dynamic available sub-catalogs / types.

### Test Plan

- If sub-catalog(s) is disabled, then all links to the sub-catalog(s) 
from the add page, topology actions, empty states, quick search, and the catalog itself should be hidden
- The sub-catalog should show `Not found` if the user opens the sub-catalog directly
- The feature should not be hidden if a sub-catalog option is disabled
- If all the available sub-catalogs are disabled, then complete Developer catalog should be hidden.

### Graduation Criteria

> This will be released directly to GA.

Reviewer 4: Have you considered putting this behind a feature gate at first? We are trying to promote more features to feature gate first to improve our product stability

Author: Since more customers don't use feature gate we want to stick to GA release. @spadgett any thoughts?

templates on the dev console.

As a cluster admin, I want to enable certain sub-catalogs (types) for all users.

### Goals

- Allow cluster admins to hide the developer catalog or certain sub-catalogs (types).
- Allow cluster admins to enable certain sub-catalogs (types) for users.
- Provide information to admins about sub-catalogs (types) they can hide from users.

### Non-Goals

- Allow cluster admins to customize categories or hide individual items.

## Proposal

We can extend the existing `operator.openshift.io/v1` / `Console CRD`. 
We can add 
`spec.customization.developerCatalog.disabledTypes` which lists types to hide and 
`spec.customization.developerCatalog.enabledTypes` which lists types to show.

### Workflow Description

```text
├── spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── developerCatalog 
|           ├── disabledTypes
|           |   └──
|           ├── enabledTypes
|               └──
└── ...
```

Each catalog conforms to the following schema:

// +optional
- `disabledTypes: string[]` , defines a list of types to hide. 

// +optional
- `enabledTypes: string[]` , defines a list of types to enable. 

Types will vary based on the operator installed.

> ### API Extensions

Reviewer 4: Somewhere here you need to explain how the enabled field operates, what happens when it's omitted, and what happens when the two lists are specified simultaneously

Author: Updated the doc.

#### Story 3

Customer wants to display only their own customized and validated 
templates on the dev console.

As a cluster admin, I want to enable certain sub-catalogs (types) for all users.

### Goals

- Allow cluster admins to hide the developer catalog or certain sub-catalogs (types).
- Allow cluster admins to enable certain sub-catalogs (types) for users.
- Provide information to admins about sub-catalogs (types) they can hide from users.

### Non-Goals

- Allow cluster admins to customize categories or hide individual items.

## Proposal

We can extend the existing `operator.openshift.io/v1` / `Console CRD`. 
We can add 
`spec.customization.developerCatalog.types.disabled` which lists types to hide and 
`spec.customization.developerCatalog.types.enabled` which lists types to show.

### Workflow Description

```text
├── spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── developerCatalog
|           ├── types
|               ├── disabled
|               |   └──
|               ├── enabled
|                   └──
└── ...
```

Each catalog conforms to the following schema:

// +optional
- `types: object` , defines the types to enable or disable.

// +optional

> - `disabled: string[]` , defines a list of types to hide. 

Reviewer 5: why we need list of disabled types ? I would assume that if the type is not enabled, then its disabled?

Reviewer 4: There are multiple use cases we are trying to account for here.
1. User cares about enabling specific catalogs and only those catalogs - they use the enabled list
2. User doesn't care about which are enabled but wants to disable a specific set - they use the disabled list
3. User wants to mix and match, enabling some specifically and disabling some specifically, they mix the two lists

An empty disabled list means don't disable anything, an empty enabled list means enable everything. This is a common pattern we've seen before. The only thing we must do is ensure that we don't ever have an item in both lists

// +optional
- `enabled: string[]` , defines a list of types to enable. 

Type(s) listed in `enabled` will only be displayed to the user and remaining type(s) 
will be hidden. 

> If a type is mentioned in both `disabled` and `enabled` then it will be hidden.

Reviewer 4: This should be an error that's validated by an admission webhook

> If `enabled` is `null`, then all the sub-catalogs(types) will be hidden.

Reviewer 4: We have an open question as a part of the API review if this is true or not, IMO an empty list for enabled means all values are displayed, that's the behaviour I have seen elsewhere

---
title: customize-catalogs
authors:
  - "@lokanandaprabhu"
reviewers:
  - "@jerolimov"
  - "@spadgett"
approvers:
  - "@spadgett"
  - "@cvogt"
api-approvers:
  - "@JoelSpeed"
creation-date: 2022-07-27
last-updated: 2022-09-14
tracking-link: 
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/ODC-6695
status: implementable
---

# Customize Catalogs

## Summary

The OpenShift Console provides a "Developer Catalog" which enables 
the user to create apps and services based on Operator backed services, helm charts, templates, etc.

> Cluster administrators can provide additional catalog types (providers) 

Reviewer 2: I know this suggestion was done earlier from me, but I understand later that types ~= Sub-catalogs and types and not the same then providers in our frontend code. Multiple providers can add items to one type. So we should remove this here to don't confuse people later.

```suggestion
Cluster administrators can provide additional catalog types
```

via console plugins, for example by installing an operator. 

> These catalog types (providers) extend the catalog with additional 

Reviewer 2: same as above, sorry that I brought this up earlier:

```suggestion
These catalog types extend the catalog with additional 
```

|                   └──
└── ...
```

To disable the types:

```text
├── spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── developerCatalog
|           ├── types
|               ├── state
|               ├── disabled
|                   └──
└── ...
```

Each catalog conforms to the following schema:

// +optional
- `types: object` , defines the types to enable or disable.

// +optional
- `state: Enabled|Disabled` , union discriminator suggests types are `Enabled` or `Disabled`. Default value is `Enabled`.

// +optional
- `disabled: string[]` , defines a list of types to hide. 

// +optional
- `enabled: string[]` , defines a list of types to enable. 

If the `state` is `Enabled` and `enabled` list is empty, all the types will be shown.
If the `state` id `Enabled` and `enabled` list is non-empty, only the `enabled` list items will be shown.
If the `state` is `Disabled` and `disabled` list is empty, all the types will be hidden.
If the `state` id `Disabled` and `disabled` list is non-empty, only the `disabled` list items will be hidden.

A type should not be listed both in `enabled` and `disabled` lists.

To disable the complete developer catalog then in `disabled` all the available types

> should be listed or make th `disabled` list empty for `state: Disabled`.

Reviewer 2: typo:

```suggestion
should be listed or make the `disabled` list empty for `state: Disabled`.
```

Types will vary based on the operator installed.

### API Extensions

Extend the existing `operator.openshift.io/v1` / `Console CRD` by adding `spec.customization.developerCatalog.types.state` 
suggests types are `Enabled` or `Disabled`,
`spec.customization.developerCatalog.types.disabled` which lists types to hide and 
`spec.customization.developerCatalog.types.enabled` which lists types to show.

So the example yaml should look like this one:

> To enable the types:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To enable (only) some specific types (sub-catalogs):
```

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata: 
  name: cluster
  ...
spec: 
  customization:
    developerCatalog:
      types:

>         state: Disabled
>         disabled: 
>           - Devfile
>           - HelmChart

Reviewer 2: The first example is talking about **enable** some types

```suggestion
        state: Enabled
        enabled: 
          - Devfile
          - HelmChart
```

  ...
```

> To disable the types:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To disable some specific types (sub-catalogs):
```

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata: 
  name: cluster
  ...
spec: 
  customization:
    developerCatalog:
      types:

>         state: Enabled
>         enabled: 
>           - Devfile
>           - HelmChart

Reviewer 2: The second example is talking about disable some types:

```suggestion
        state: Disabled
        disabled: 
          - Devfile
          - HelmChart
```

  ...
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Can we have one more example here for disable everything:

```suggestion
To disable the complete Developer Catalog and all sub-catalogs:

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Console
metadata: 
  name: cluster
  ...
spec: 
  customization:
    developerCatalog:
      types:
        state: Enabled
        enabled: [] // Enabling no specific type means that all types are disabled!
```
```

```text
├── spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── developerCatalog
|           ├── types
|               ├── state
|               ├── enabled
|                   └──
└── ...
```

To disable the types:

```text
├── spec
│   ├── customization
|       ├── developerCatalog
|           ├── types
|               ├── state
|               ├── disabled
|                   └──
└── ...
```

Each catalog conforms to the following schema:

// +optional
- `types: object` , defines the types to enable or disable.

// +optional
- `state: Enabled|Disabled` , union discriminator suggests types are `Enabled` or `Disabled`. Default value is `Enabled`.

// +optional
- `disabled: string[]` , defines a list of types to hide. 

// +optional
- `enabled: string[]` , defines a list of types to enable. 

If the `state` is `Enabled` and `enabled` list is empty, all the types will be shown.
If the `state` id `Enabled` and `enabled` list is non-empty, only the `enabled` list items will be shown.
If the `state` is `Disabled` and `disabled` list is empty, all the types will be hidden.
If the `state` id `Disabled` and `disabled` list is non-empty, only the `disabled` list items will be hidden.

> A type should not be listed both in `enabled` and `disabled` lists.

Reviewer 4: They can't be anymore as the two lists are mutually exclusive, can delete this or update it

Author: Deleted it.
